INTRODUCTION
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The impact of weather on small package shipment deliverability is of great 
concern to my client.  To that end, an algorithm will be developed to provide 
some predictive capability to my client, using weather forecast data combined 
with package route data (based on origin and destination addresses).  My client 
has provided millions of records of actual package data, and that data will be 
combined with publically available weather data and analyzed using several 
statistical models to help human operators classify packages as more or less 
likely to be delivered late due to weather.

INITIAL DATA
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The data sets provided by my client contain several million packages, each 
with roughly 5-10 "package activity" records (essentially the same as the data 
you would see when "tracking" a package on ups.com or fedex.com).  My client 
also provided a table of United States ZIP codes, and the centroid latitude / 
longitude pair for each ZIP code. I was able to locate an extensive public 
data set containing weather observations from the NOAA (Quality Controlled 
Local Climatological Data [1]).  This data set contained (at least) hourly 
observations from thousands of weather stations across the United States, as 
well as a separate smaller data set containing the geographic location of each 
weather station making the observation.

DATA FIELDS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The package data provided all necessary information to determine whether or 
not the package was late, and if it was late, whether or not the package was 
late due to issues with weather.  The primary identifier used to link the 
packages with the package activities was the package tracking number, which is 
unique among shipping carriers and the six-month or so time span we were 
dealing with.  Each package activity record contained the ZIP code the 
activity occurred in, which, combined with the ZIP code table provided by my 
client, was used to positively link each package activity record with the 
closest weather observation in time and space.

LIMITATIONS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The provided package data set had several limitations.  Whether or not a 
package was late due to weather was able to be determined with a good deal of 
accuracy, but there were still some assumptions that went into that 
calculation.  There were also packages and weather observations with missing 
data, but that data appeared to be missing data unrelated to any issue 
correlated with what we were trying to determine, so most of the package and 
weather records with missing relevant data were simply deleted.  There was 
enough data without the few records with missing data.  The remaining data was 
filled in either with an average where appropriate, or with a calculation, in 
the case of weather data.  For example, where we had both dry and wet bulb 
temperature but no relative humidity we could apply a well-known calculation 
to get an accurate estimate of relative humidity.

DATA CLEANING AND WRANGLING
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The data required extensive cleaning and wrangling, and this process is 
documented in the "data_import.sql" file (most cleaning and wrangling was 
performed in PostgreSQL), and to a lesser extent, in the "capstone.R" file.  
The raw data provided by my client contained many proprietary fields which 
were not relevant to the problem being addressed.  The package activity data 
also had to be associated with the nearest weather observation, which involved 
generating the centroid latitude / longitude pair for each package activity 
observation and mathematically determining which weather station was closest.  
The PostGIS [2] module for the PostgreSQL database was used for these 
calculations.  Many other cleaning and wrangling steps had to be performed, as 
documented in the previously mentioned files.

The final wrangling step performed was due to the fact that the weather data 
is connected to the package activity data, and the variable to be predicted is 
instead associated with the package table.  So in order to apply the simple 
predictive models I wanted to start with, I needed to join the weather data 
set, the package activity data set, and the package data set together and 
group by the tracking number.  In doing so, I ended up with one table that 
contains the mean, maximum, and minimum of each relevant weather observation 
for each package.

PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
As documented (in preliminary form) in the "capstone.R" file, some early 
findings show a correlation between several aggregated weather variables and 
the "late due to weather" indicator.  However, the accuracy of these models is 
poor.  This appears to be due to the fact that we have a large number of 
observations and are trying to predict a rare event, that is a package being 
late due to weather issues.  So the accuracy of our model is poorer than our 
null prediction of no packages being late due to weather -- this is such a 
rare event that a model would need very high accuracy to beat the null 
prediction.  However, because such a null model is obviously of no use to my 
client, even a model with poorer accuracy might still be preferable.

FUTURE APPROACHES
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
There are two primary areas that will be explored.  The first is to better the 
possibly naive first approach at aggregating the data when the package and 
package activity tables were combined.  That aggregation left me with the 
mean, minimum, and maximum of each variable per package, as seen across all 
package activity records for that package.  That aggregation eliminated some 
information that may still be useful.

Second, other predictive models should be explored.  I have begun to explore a 
decision tree model, but have not yet had a chance to explore it fully.  It is 
also possible that combining several models would yield a better result.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[1] http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/orders/qclcd/
[2] http://postgis.net/
